---
layout: post
title: "On Tipped Percentages"
subtitle: My take on modern "tipping culture".  
background: "/assets/img/tip.jpg"
categories: [thoughts]
---

Tipping has become a mostly unquestioned part of dining out in America. At the end of each meal, we pull out our credit cards and hand them over, then do our best to rely on the mental math skills we earned in grade school to calculate how much to tip the server. "Just move the comma one place and double it" seems the accepted practice, which for those of us who don't excel at arithmetic comes out to an even 20%. Most of the time this is post-tax and will almost entirely go into the server's pocket. And we don't really ask any questions because it's well-understood that the server is only making about $2 and change an hour, so of course it's a good thing that we tip well. We can go home knowing we helped the poor, starving server out by our generosity and show of gratitude. _But tipped percentages don't really make a lot of sense when we ask a few obvious questions._ And there are a few reasons why, specifically in food service, they can be incredibly unfair to consumers. 

**How it all got started**

Funny enough, tipping didn't even really start in the U.S. Originally, tipping was a way medieval Eurpoeans used to show off their wealth by tossing coins to servants or drivers as a means of flexing. Tipping was neither an expectation from workers nor a cultural norm, and certainly wasn't relied upon to make a day's wage. To simplify, tipping was orignially about rich folks feeling powerful. Once the U.S. was well-established after the Civil War, Americans began taking part in similar tipping practices as a way to demonstrate a show of class, status, etc. However, most Americans hated the practice and thought it an offense to equality and not aligned with how America was built - by hard work. But tipping persevered nonetheless as business owners saw it as a means to outsource wages to the rich show-offs, stiff formerly enslaved African Americans out of fair wages (mainly in white sleeper cars, hotels, and restaurants) and has morphed over time into what we consider to be "tipping culture" in today's America. 

**What Uncle Sam has to say about it**

It seems most of the tipping that goes on today is, or at least used to be, centered around tipping waitstaff at restaurants. This is most prominent in sit-down restaurants where you're served by a young lady or gentleman throughout the evening. Most Americans are under the impression, which is often the case, that waitstaff are severely underpaid by their employers on an hourly basis - most making as little as the currently approved federal _subminimum wage_ of $2.13/hour. So naturally we jump to the conclusion that if we don't tip these servers well, they'll go home broke. How dare we stiff a waiter with a small tip when they're getting paid so little? Well, here's the first issue with that. If a waiter made zero tips throughout the night and their employer still paid them only $2.13/hour, they'd be breaking the law. The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) dicates that if a waiter fails to make the additional $5.12/hour via tips that the employer is then legally required to make up the difference with a higher cash wage. So there's no world where any waiter ever goes home pocketing less than the federal minimum wage, which is $7.25. Granted, $7.25/hour isn't anything to cheer for, but it's a welcomed alternative to a mere $2.13. The discussion over whether $7.25/hour is a reasonable minimum wage is a different conversation, but the fact remains that these workers are not being stiffed out of at least that. But all it takes is one single family who leaves a $10 bill on the table and voila - you're making just as much as the fry cook at Bojangles across the street. 

**The myth of the poor, starving waiter**

The backlash against a "no tipping" philosophy, or even a 10% tipping philosophy, is naturally most concerned with the financial well-being of the waiter in question. Most believe that a failure to tip is a failure to give the waiter a reasonable living. After all, they live on tips! Sure, point taken. But ask around to some of your friends or family who are waiters and I bet you'll be shocked to discover just how much they can make off tips. There's a reasonable gap between someone who waits tables at Chili's or Red Robin vs. someone who works at a 5 star rooftop restaurant, sure. But more often than not, servers can make hundreds of dollars within a few hours of work purely off tips. Let's say the typical waiter averages a conservative 3 tables an hour on an 8 hour shift, so 24 tables for the day. At Chili's the average bill for a party of 2 is probably somewhere in the ballpark of $30-40. Most semi-upscale Steakhouses you're probably talking $100-150. So taking 3 tables/hour, the Chili's waiter can look to pull in about $6-8/table and the steakhouse waiter $20-30/table. So that's $18-24/hour for the Chili's waiter and $60-90/hour for the steakhouse waiter. This all assumes everyone is paying a 20% tip post-tax. So considering that, does it seem reasonable that a waiter at a steakhouse is making more than some mechanical engineers? Why are they making 3-4x as much as the Chili's waiter? But nevertheless, the accepted norm is that waiters are struggling to make ends meet so we must do the right thing and tip them well. 20% is the standard and anything below that is just cheap. "If you can't afford to tip 20%, then don't eat out!" But odds are, everyone tipping 20% is making these people some of the most highly compensated hourly workers in the city. But don't you dare skimp on the tip, because they're poor and starving. 

**The issue with tipped percentages**

This isn't even about tipping vs. not tipping, it's about these arbitrary percentage tips making no sense. Consider this: my wife and I go to a steakhouse and both order cocktails, split a salad, 2 ribeyes, and a dessert. Total comes out to $150, $180 after tip (20% = $30). The next night we go back, but instead both order water, split a salad, split a ribeye, and skip dessert. Total is $75, $90 after tip (20% = $15). On both evenings, the waiter brought 2 beverages to the table, a salad, and at least one steak. Only difference being on night 1 they walked to the bar for our cocktails and carried 2 more plates to the table - the second ribeye and the dessert. But our bill was higher on night 1, which earned them an extra $15. Two plates = $15? Seems a little disproportionate. Or take this example: We order the exact same thing on night 2 as night 1, but instead order 2 tomahawk steaks. Bill was $250. Waiter did the same exact amount of work, but night 2 earned them an extra $20 because we chose to order a more expensive cut of steak. **This** is my problem with tipped percentages. They don't really have anything to do with how the waiter performed, how skilled they are, or how friendly they were throughout the night, but has everything to do with how much you decide to spend. This seems to me like it will naturally incentivize a waiter to pay more attention to the wealthy old couple who has ordered hundreds of dollars worth of food and drinks instead of the young couple who is splitting a pizza and Diet Coke.  If we're so concerned with these waiters making the minimum wage, shouldn't we just tip the $5.12 that's needed? Why have we convinced ourselves that walking back and forth to our table while carrying a few drinks and plates is somehow worth $30? If you want to tip generously, do it! I have no objections to tipping generously as a means of gratitude - after all, why do we call it "gratuity?" If a server does a phenomenal job or makes some great recommendations, by all means tip what you want. But let's get past the idea of arbitrary percentages as an expectation and the guilt that comes along with anything that falls short of 20%. 
